---
layout: post
title:  "Asset management and automation"
date:   2023-01-18
categories: [AI, Finance]
excerpt: > #
  How much automation in asset management is the right amount?
  Should the computer make all the investment decisions itself? Where is human expertise still needed?
  Transcript of a podcast interview that I gave some years ago.
math: false
---

Given the precision of speech-to-text AI models these days, I decided
to use [OpenAI's whisper model](https://openai.com/blog/whisper/)
together with
[pyannote-audio](https://github.com/pyannote/pyannote-audio) in order
to build myself an automated podcast transcription tool. As a test
example I used the tool to automatically generate a German transcript
of a podcast interview that I did some years ago. It actually worked
pretty well even for German language. Afterwards I translated the
transcript into English using
[DeepL](https://www.deepl.com/translator) (and didn't further modify
the output).

<br>

You can find further info on the [episode's
page](https://de.scalable.capital/money-market-and-machines/mmm-automatisierte-geldanlage-mit-dr-christian-groll)
of the Money, Markets and Machines Podcast of Scalable Capital.

We talked about:

- varying degrees of automation and AI
- problems of overfitting if investment rules are generated by the model
- the combination of human and machine
- pecularities of financial data
- alternative data sources for asset management


You can find the German transcript [here](/2022/01/Automation_asset_management/mmm_german_podcast_transcript.html):

<br>

<audio controls="" volume="0.5" style="width: 100%">
  <source src="https://downloads.ctfassets.net/kcbf79ije7q7/4cdKLOcWruYPdSMOzBpD0g/ea420096d9315e7e351643321e795868/SC_VV_Podcast_3_Automatisierte_Geldanlage_fixed.mp3">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>

### Transcript

<p>0:00:09 - 0:00:30: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> Good afternoon, welcome again to the Scalable Capital Podcast. I
am Tobias Aigner and today I would like to take you into the world of
artificial intelligence and machine learning. Specifically, we want to
talk about how much automation investment actually tolerates and
whether, for example, Scalable's investment algorithm learns its
investment rules itself. Our expert on this topic is Christian Groll,
Scalable's Head of Quantitative Investment Strategy, and he's sitting
here with me today. Hello Christian, good to have you here.

</p>
<br>

<p>0:00:30 - 0:00:31: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p>
Hi. 
</p>
<br>

<p>0:00:31 - 0:00:50: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> Christian, maybe you could first tell us a little bit about
yourself. How did you come to Scalable and what exactly do you do
here?

</p>
<br>
<p>0:00:50 - 0:01:56: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Yes, very much so. I studied business mathematics in Munich and
then did my doctorate in statistics at the chair of Professor Stefan
Mittnik, who is one of the founders of Scalable Capital. When I saw
through Stefan that Scalable Capital offered me the opportunity to put
my academic knowledge into practice, I joined Scalable in 2015. With
Stefan, we have always been very academically oriented and research
and quantitative modeling are basically just as much a part of
everyday life here as they were at university. The motivation and in
principle our main task is to understand and model the financial
market as well as possible. And I don't think we are far away from the
university in terms of motivation. But beyond that, I also see it as
part of our task to be as transparent as possible to the outside
world. We also have a quant blog, where we are gradually describing
components of the algorithm and working through financial market
topics that are relevant for modeling.


</p>
<br>
<p>0:01:58 - 0:02:04: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> Let's get into the topic. How would you describe the describe
Scalable Capital's investment model?

</p>
<br>
<p>0:02:05 - 0:02:38: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Yes, I would say the main pillars of the model are a global and
across multiple asset classes, diversified investment universe with
low product costs, so we use ETFs, automated and rule-based and
dynamic risk management, individual portfolio monitoring and
adjustment, and importantly also, yes I would say, a strong belief
that any investment decisions should be based on as solid empirical
data as possible.


</p>
<br>
<p>0:02:38 - 0:02:46: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> And when you say automated, does that mean that the computer
really makes the decisions itself? Can you say that?


</p>
<br>
<p>0:02:46 - 0:05:40: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Yes, I think I'll have to elaborate a bit more on that first. Not
all automation is the same. There are extreme differences in what can
be hidden behind the term. In the media, there's always talk of
artificial intelligence and machine learning, although no one ever
really defines what they mean. In particular, I think it is very
important to understand how high the degree of human influence is in
an automated allocation decision. So I'll try to sketch it out using
the example that I recently read in a really great didactic article by
AQR, which is a US hedge fund. The idea is to implement an algorithm
that decides for a given text input, i.e. a character string
consisting of letters, digits and special characters, whether it is a
valid e-mail address or not. So the first variant is, I simply look up
all the defined rules for e-mail addresses myself and then hand them
over to the computer already ready. For example, I can define that a
valid e-mail address must always have an "@" character, must not have
any spaces and must not have more than 253 characters. I can now
simply pass this set of rules to the computer as a sequence of if-then
checks. So basically it tests every requirement I defined and checks
if it is fulfilled or not. And if even one requirement is not
fulfilled, the string would then be classified as a non-valid e-mail
address. So now the computer has no freedom of decision in principle,
so it just stubbornly executes the rules given by me. But
nevertheless, at the end of the day, I have of course built an
algorithm that works fully automated for me. Given inputs, the rules I
specify are applied and the corresponding output is produced. So and
on the other end of the spectrum, there was now a completely different
approach. Namely, I no longer give the computer any rules, but in the
end simply give myself a comprehensive collection of input-output
combinations. So in our example, let's say we give the computer five
million input strings for each of which we have already classified
whether it is a valid e-mail address or not. So based on the example
data set, the computer then looks for the rules itself with which it
will classify future e-mail addresses. So instead of the
subject-specific expert knowledge or the assumptions that which we
have to translate into a set of rules, we only need this we only need
this collection of already evaluated sample data as a prerequisite.
evaluated sample data. But "only" in quotation marks, which is is not
a matter of course that such data is already available. are already
available. Someone has to classify the five million strings to
determine whether they are valid e-mail addresses or not. valid e-mail
address or not.


</p>
<br>
<p>0:05:41 - 0:05:47: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> So both variants outlined. The exciting question now is, of
course, which one is better or which one should be preferred?


</p>
<br>
<p>0:05:48 - 0:07:57: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Yes, before we think about that, let's talk briefly about the
potential weaknesses of the two approaches. Sure, in the traditional
approach, we are of course highly dependent on whether the rules given
by the expert are actually correct. That is, of course, relatively
clear. With the second approach, you can talk about artificial
intelligence to a certain extent, and the problems with the rules that
are found are always a bit more difficult to uncover. Let me give you
a few examples of what could go wrong. First, let's assume that the
computer is suddenly confronted with an input that has not yet
occurred in the previous example data set. So in our example now a
test address with a space comes along for the first time. If such an
input has not occurred in the data so far, the computer must
ultimately decide without any point of reference what the best rule is
here. So it has to extrapolate and apply a rule beyond the existing
set of observed inputs. Second, and of course this is a problem with
statistics in general, existing relationships can always change.
Historical data may no longer be meaningful for the present. In the
past, for example, e-mail addresses always had to end in domains like
.com or .de etc.. Nowadays the restrictions are less. For example, my
work email ends with @scalable.capital. If it was not yet mapped in
the example data set, then the computer is of course working with
outdated rules. And yes, thirdly, the rules found by the computer are
often extremely intransparent and difficult for humans to understand.
So what exactly prompted the computer to classify an e-mail as an
invalid is usually unclear. As a result, it is quite possible that an
e-mail was classified correctly, but only by chance by applying an
actually wrong rule. This may be extremely difficult to notice at
first, because the classification on the sample data set was correct.
But when applying it to new data, you will soon realize that the wrong
rules were learned in the background.



</p>
<br>
<p>0:07:58 - 0:08:07: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> The bottom line is that which approach is better is decided by
whether you trust the computer's rules or the expert's rules more,
right? 


</p>
<br>
<p>0:08:07 - 0:09:55: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Yes, you could formulate it like that in general or now translated
specifically only to the rules of the computer. The trustworthiness
ultimately results from how comprehensive and representative the
sample data set is and the extent to which it can be ruled out that
the computer does not inadvertently pick up patterns in the data that
do not actually exist. The statistical term for this is the so-called
overfitting. One of my favorite anecdotes to illustrate the problem I
read the other day in one of your texts. For one application, the
computer was supposed to automatically recognize tanks in digital
images. The basic idea was to somehow use artificial intelligence to
create an algorithm that would recognize whether the given image
contained a tank or not. So, the computer was fed with example data,
so that it can learn a set of rules and on the example data set itself
it also worked outstandingly. But when the algorithm was used in
reality, it failed miserably. And the reason for that was that the
computer had not actually learned to recognize a tank at all, but in
the example data set, all the tank images had simply been taken in the
sunshine. And so what the computer had actually recognized was just
the sunshine in the images. So it basically then identified every
sunshine image as a tank image because it had built a completely wrong
set of rules, but it happened to work on the sample data anyway. But
out of sample, that is, outside the known example data set, it just
didn't work anymore. And the avoidance of overfitting, that is, this
avoidance of incorrectly picked up patterns in the data, that is
certainly one of the greatest challenges in the application of
artificial intelligence.

</p>
<br>
<p>0:09:55 - 0:10:02: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> Let's take a look at the algorithm of scalable. To what extent
does artificial artificial intelligence really play a role?


</p>
<br>
<p>0:10:02 - 0:11:22: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Yes, so far we have only dealt with rather extreme examples of
algorithms in order to hopefully make it more or less understandable
how different approaches to automation can be and what one can roughly
imagine by artificial intelligence. In reality, however, there is of
course no reason whatsoever to subject oneself to such extreme
black-and-white thinking. So why not just try to combine the best of
both worlds? Perhaps I could refer again to the example of e-mail
addresses. Even if I, as an expert, am not sure which special
characters are actually allowed, I can tell the algorithm to pay
special attention to them and then create a suitable set of rules. Or
I can simply specify that an @ symbol is mandatory and that there is
some maximum length of allowed characters and so on. With this help,
the self-learning part of the algorithm can then use the existing
sample data much more efficiently, which in the end simply reduces the
risk of potential misinterpretation. Transferred to the world of
finance, this would mean, for example, that I would tell the algorithm
how best to calculate risk. But you could still let it learn how best
to handle this information.


</p>
<br>
<p>0:11:23 - 0:11:53: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> Scalable's dynamic risk management is designed to determine the
risk in the portfolio and then derive decisions for action from that.
For example, whether to reduce the equity quota or increase
commodities or bonds, whatever. In this way, the customer's risk
specifications are always adhered to. That is the idea behind it. Is
it really the case that I have to imagine this risk management system
as receiving part of the rules from you and working out the other part
by itself? Can you put it that way?

</p>
<br>
<p>0:11:53 - 0:15:14: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Yes, here again I would say that there are very many different
gradations as to how much leeway I could leave to the computer itself
to react to a calculated risk level. And I would say that, for many
reasons, we have tightened the thumbscrews rather tightly. The
algorithm can certainly not simply create its own rules. But a certain
amount of freedom should be allowed to ensure that the investment
model is in line with the historical financial market data. A small
example perhaps of what I mean, so let's just assume that we are
convinced that an increase in financial market risks is generally a
rather undesirable phenomenon, to which we want to respond by
rebalancing in a certain way. So for simplicity, let's say the desired
response would be to reduce the proportion of risky securities in the
portfolio and increase the proportion of low-risk securities. That's
specified in what way I want to respond, but just not yet how much.
So, in other words, for a given increase in risk, I could still either
shift only rather slightly or sell all high-risk securities right
away. Which reaction is optimal depends on how sustainable the
increase in risk is. And in order to find the right measure here, it
makes sense to let the computer learn with the help of historical data
which measure of reaction had proven to be useful in the past.
However, my feeling is that I would not normally speak of machine
learning here. In principle, a statistical model is simply estimated
with data in a very classical way. The term learning doesn't really
mean anything else, but I think it was introduced to give it a special
extravagant touch. In any case, I think there are a lot of
possibilities in portfolio management to let the computer refine an
economically motivated, predefined set of rules with the help of
historical data in order to hopefully arrive at an optimal investment
decision. This has always been the idea of economics or financial
economics, simply the symbiosis of economic theory with empirical
modeling. And another example where you would give the computer some
leeway is something like conflicting goals that you have to solve. So
in general, the investor prefers, let's say, high returns, low risk
and low transaction costs. A conflict of objectives exists when an
improvement in one of the three objectives always automatically leads
to a deterioration in at least one of the other objectives. In other
words, if I want to have a portfolio that is optimally positioned in
terms of return and risk every day, then I would have to make
transactions on an ongoing basis, which in turn would cause costs to
skyrocket. So even in such cases, the computer can help to determine
the sweet spot, so to speak, the optimal point in the conflict of
objectives. Overall, however, I think that in the world of finance in
particular, you have to be extremely careful about where you leave the
computer and how much leeway you leave it to determine its own rules.


</p>
<br>
<p>0:15:14 - 0:15:22: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> You just said in the financial world, what do you mean, how is the
financial world different from other areas?


</p>
<br>
<p>0:15:22 - 0:18:58: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> I would say, well, the signal-to-noise ratio, that is, the ratio
of relevant patterns in the data to simple, random patterns that are
ultimately meaningless for further modeling, is extremely low for
financial data. Let's somehow take soccer score prediction as a
comparison. Assuming now that we consider a knockout match of any two
teams, there are only two possible outcomes. Either team A will
advance or team B. If I know absolutely nothing about both teams, then
my best guess is, well, that the probability for both teams to advance
is 50-50. So in principle we can't do anything but guess. But if I
know that Team A is the quite successful German national team and Team
B is an absolute underdog, then anyone with a little bit of soccer
knowledge could predict that probably the German national team will
advance. Of course, we're not always right, but let's say we're right
eight times out of ten. That's because the structural difference in
quality between the two teams is so clear that it overrides the chance
that also exists in the game. So in games with relatively unbalanced
opponents, I think it's quite easy to make a prediction that works out
much better than 50-50. But if you look at the stock market for
comparison, even systematic strategies that have been successful for
decades have a probability of a positive return of at least over 50
percent on a randomly selected day. The predictive power is therefore
almost as precise as a coin toss, and a knowledge advantage only
becomes noticeable over a really long period of time. Yes, then the
question is, why is that? I think the key point about the financial
market is that it is an adaptive system in which the development of
prices is influenced by the predictions and views of individual market
participants. So if I have a knowledge edge in the financial market,
that always means that there is an opportunity for a profitable
investment. And if you now assume that market participants generally
maximize profit, think and act, then of course they would always have
an incentive to try to turn this knowledge advantage into money. So,
and now market prices are ultimately also only the result of supply
and demand. So if the demand for a security increases due to a certain
knowledge advantage, the market price will automatically change as
well. And it will continue to do so until there is nothing left to be
gained from the original knowledge advantage. At least this is the
hypothesis of the efficient financial market, for which the American
economist Eugene Fama was awarded the Nobel Prize. Through profit
maximization and the interplay of supply and demand, predictions
ultimately have a direct influence on market prices themselves, i.e.
on the quantity that one actually wanted to predict. This is a
fundamental difference to other scientific fields and especially a
problem with machine learning. I recently heard a very funny anecdote
about this from AQR, who compared the prediction on the financial
market with the recognition of cats on photos. The statement was
something like, yes, cats don't start turning into dogs as soon as the
algorithm gets too good at recognizing cats. That's why machine
learning and artificial intelligence play a bigger role in image
recognition than in the adaptive financial market.



</p>
<br>
<p>0:18:58 - 0:19:07: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> Okay, but the bottom line then is that in the financial world, you
should just rely much more on predetermined rules and not give the
computer too much leeway.


</p>
<br>
<p>0:19:07 - 0:20:46: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Yes, I do think that empirical studies currently still tend to
indicate that less leeway for the computer is definitely advisable. In
other words, the risk of otherwise possibly picking up on wrong
patterns in the data is simply enormously high and would otherwise add
an additional and unnecessarily dangerous component to the investment
decision. The requirements for a good set of rules should be that it
should prove robust with respect to several dimensions. What do I mean
by that? First, yes, it should be consistent. So over a long period of
time, and ideally across different investment universes, there should
have been demonstrable positive results. It should be robust. So if I
now make any slight changes to the parameters, then the whole thing
should behave stably. So, for example, if I now only marginally change
the model for determining risks, of course it should not come out with
fundamentally different investment decisions. And third, it should be
plausible. In other words, it should be broadly consistent with
existing economic theory. And with some algorithms, as they exist in
artificial intelligence, you usually end up with a so-called black
box. In principle, this is a set of rules that makes decisions, but
without providing much insight into how these decisions are made. And
accordingly, the rules chosen by the computer cannot be translated
directly into rules that can be understood and interpreted by humans.
Of course, this automatically excludes a bit of comparison with
existing economic theory.

</p>
<br>
<p>0:20:47 - 0:21:14: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> Now we have talked a lot about novel algorithms. What I'm also
interested in now, what is known, are, for example, new types of data
sources. For example, satellite images of parking lots in front of
supermarkets that are used to make decisions or compile information.
Social media comments, smartphone geolocation data to figure out
consumer behavior. Internet search engine data, all that stuff. What
do you think about that?


</p>
<br>
<p>0:21:14 - 0:21:46: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Yes, the question fits perfectly here. I can answer about the same
thing again right away. Here, too, my first hint would always be, yes,
fixed rules should be consistent, i.e. they should be verifiable over
a longer period of time. So, now let's assume I use novel data sources
to derive any investment decisions. It doesn't matter whether the
rules come from experts or from the computer. If I have the necessary
data sources only over a very limited period of time back into the
past, then the rules and the resulting benefit can of course only be
empirically tested to a very limited extent.


</p>
<br>
<p>0:21:47 - 0:21:49: Tobias
</p>
<br>
<p> Why is this so dangerous or what does it lead to?


</p>
<br>
<p>0:21:50 - 0:23:52: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Well, the full risk profile of an investment strategy can only be
guessed at once it has been observed over at least one full economic
cycle. Even after such a full economic cycle or even several, it is
also possible that one still has no observation of certain extreme
events, because they may occur only once in 100 years or so. Ideally,
therefore, one has as long as possible observation periods and, if
possible, also observations from several different framework
conditions of the global economy and financial market. Only then can
it be said with sufficient conviction that a set of rules will
actually generate positive added value in the long term. The classic
metaphor for this is the time series of a turkey before Thanksgiving.
In the months before Thanksgiving, he always gets enough to eat.
However, anyone who extrapolates on the basis of experience that the
turkey will still be in good health and well-fed after Thanksgiving
could hardly be more wrong. One needs data from all environmental
states, i.e. both the time of fattening and the time of slaughter, to
be clear about the risk profile. Is a very short history now an
exclusion criterion with these innovative data sources? No, of course
not. And we also consider the trend toward more and more available and
different data sources to be promising. But I think you have to be
careful that certain innovative data sources, such as social media
posts, smartphones, geo-locations or something like that, have only
been available for a few years. And you just always have to keep that
in mind. During that time, we simply haven't had any major upheavals
in the stock markets and we've also had, let's say, an extremely
extraordinary interest rate environment since then. So the supposed
benefits of innovative data sources cannot be transferred to other
financial market environments in the same way.

</p>
<br>
<p>0:23:52 - 0:24:03: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> Finally, after all the algorithms, let's come back to the topic of
people, namely the portfolio manager when investing. What makes a good
portfolio manager for you?


</p>
<br>
<p>0:24:04 - 0:25:24: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p> Humility and the honesty to analyze past decisions relentlessly.
In my opinion, every successful investment strategy requires two
things. Firstly, a good assessment of the market situation and
secondly, you have to draw the right conclusions from it. And
overconfidence is a massive risk for investment success. Let's take
the example of someone who can correctly predict a coin toss with a 55
percent probability. That is an outstanding ability, ultimately, no
human being, no person in the world can do. But if the person now
thinks that he would be right 100 percent of the time instead of 55
percent of the time, that is, if he would overestimate himself, so to
speak, then he would be inclined to bet almost all his money on a
single coin toss. He thinks that there is a 100 percent probability
that he will get it right. In reality, however, he would be bankrupt
with a 45 percent probability. And yes, that's one of the reasons why
I'm a big fan of quantitative, rule-based investment strategies.
Numbers don't lie, and when you check the existing set of rules with
historical data, you get the probability of misjudgements in black and
white, so to speak. In my opinion, this is the best means against
overestimating oneself.


</p>
<br>
<p>0:25:24 - 0:25:37: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> Very interesting, so I humbly say, thank you very much for the interview, Christian.

</p>
<br>
<p>0:25:37 - 0:25:39: Christian
</p>
<br>

<p>
Thank you too.

</p>
<br>
<p>0:25:39 - 0:25:47: Tobias
</p>
<br>

<p> This was our podcast episode on the topic of automation in
investment. If you would like more information on this, you can find
it on our website or send us an email at podcast@scalable.capital.
Thank you very much for listening.


</p>
<br>
<p>0:25:52 - 0:26:18: Risk Disclaimer
</p>
<br>

<p> Scalable Capital Vermögensverwaltung GmbH, does not provide
investment, legal or tax advice. Should this podcast contain
information about the capital market, financial instruments and or
other topics relevant to the investment, this information serves
solely to explain the services provided. The capital investment is
associated with risks. Please refer to the information on our website.

</p>
<br>